What is OIDC article (#2776)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: astro/src/content/articles/identity-basics/what-is-oidc.mdx

---
title: "What Is OIDC?"
description: "What Is OIDC, OpenID Connnect, And How Do You Use It?"
author: Dan Moore
icon: /img/icons/what-is-scim.svg
section: Identity Basics
date: 2023-12-10
dateModified: 2023-12-10
---
import Aside from '/src/components/Aside.astro';
import ExampleIdToken from 'src/content/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/oauth/_example_id_token.mdx';
import OIDCFlow from "../../../diagrams/articles/identity-basics/oidc-flow.astro";

> OIDC, which stands for OpenID Connect, is a specification to allow users to authenticate using a standard protocol. This article covers what OIDC is, why you might want to use it, and how it works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OIDC, which stands for OpenID Connect, is a specification that allows users to authenticate using a standard protocol. This article covers what OIDC is, why you might want to use it, and how it works.
```

## What Is OIDC?

OIDC is a standard built on top of two different standards that solves the common problem of authenticating users. OIDC leverages both OAuth, which defines the data flow and specifics around token generation, and OpenID, which defines the authentication process.

It's an extremely flexible framework that can cover both simple authentication systems and complex large-scale systems. There is a core set of functionality defined in the specification as well as a fair amount of optional behavior and additional specifications handling use cases beyond authentication such as sign out and session management.

## What Does OIDC Allow?

> At a high level, using OIDC lets you delegate user authentication in a standardized fashion. By running an OIDC compliant identity data store, other applications, including custom built apps, open source applications, commercial off the shelf apps, and SaaS solutions, can all use the same authentication solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At a high level, using OIDC lets you delegate user authentication in a standardized fashion. By running an OIDC-compliant identity data store, other applications, including custom-built apps, open source applications, commercial off-the-shelf apps, and SaaS solutions, can all use the same authentication solution.
```

> For example, you could have your own application (custom-built), forum software like Discourse (open source), Oracle (COTS), and Zendesk all delegate authentication to your OIDC compliant user identity datastore. You can support both employees and customers using such a solution. In fact, because so many customer applications are web apps, OIDC is a perfect fit for a customer identity and access management (CIAM) system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you could have your application (custom-built), forum software like Discourse (open source), Oracle (COTS), and Zendesk all delegate authentication to your OIDC-compliant user identity datastore. You can support both employees and customers using such a solution. Because many customer applications are web apps, OIDC is a perfect fit for a customer identity and access management (CIAM) system.
```

* when you add layers of authentication security to your OIDC server, all applications benefit without any effort

OIDC is unique because:

* many modern applications support it
* it's built for web and mobile applications
* as it is built on OAuth, OIDC flows can get an access token, useful if you are also using APIs

Let's dive into some of the major pieces of OIDC.

## Users, OIDC Providers and Relying Parties

OIDC has a few important components:

* An end user who is trying to get access to an application using a browser or mobile device.
* An OpenID provider (OP), which is an OAuth 2.0 compatible authorization server. The OP authenticates users. It can also delegate authentication to other identity stores via OIDC or other protocols.
* A relying party (RP), which is an application that needs to identify the end user.

An example of an OP is FusionAuth. Examples of RPs include:

* Your custom web or mobile application
* Commercial SaaS software like SaleForce or Zendesk
* Open source software like Discourse
* Cloud software providers like AWS and GCP

Here's an example OIDC flow, using the authorization code flow.

<OIDCFlow/>

> For the RP, the end result of an interaction with the OP is a set of tokens which contain information about the user. Let's look at those next.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the RP, the end result of an interaction with the OP is a set of tokens that contain information about the user. Let's look at those next.
```

## Tokens

Because OIDC is built on top of OAuth, an access token is always returned, but an Id token and possibly a refresh token are returned as well. The Id token is the star of the OIDC show, because it contains authentication information, so that's what this article will focus on.

The Id token looks like this:

> <ExampleIdToken/>

Reviewer: <img width="623" alt="image" src="https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-site/assets/139158618/0a2e8eef-cbef-4dbc-b92c-c49794460cc8">

Could we add something with more imagery so that people will understand where this information comes from? I think some will just see this and get confused.

<img width="885" alt="image" src="https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-site/assets/139158618/afded0c0-d269-4ba2-93e2-0e3c1a6a5f71">

The Id token is a signed JWT and must be validated. The claims inside the token can be examined by the RP to determine the identity of the user who went through the flow. 

<Aside type="note">
A claim is a fancy term for a key/value pair in the JSON object which is the payload the JWT [Learn more about JWTs](/articles/tokens/).
</Aside>

> There are a number of standard claims defined by the OIDC standard. Some reflect the authentication event and details about the OP. These include but are not limited to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several standard claims defined by the OIDC standard. Some reflect the authentication event and details about the OP. These include but are not limited to:
```

* `sub`, an identifier for the end user at the OP.
* `name`, the full name, in a format displayable to humans.
* `preferred_username`, a preferred username for the RP to use. This is not guaranteed to be unique.
* `email`, the user's preferred email address. Again, this is not guaranteed to be unique.
* `email_verified` which is `true` if the email address has been verified to be controlled by the end user, as defined by the OP.
* `locale`, the end user's locale, like `en-US` or `fr-CA`.
* `phone_number`, the user's preferred telephone number.
* `updated_at`, the time the user's information was last updated.

All times are numbers representing the number of seconds since the unix epoch. The `iss`, `sub`, `aud`, `exp`, and `iat` claims are required and will be present in every Id token. Every other claim is optional, though some are required if the RP requests them or the OP is configured in certain ways. 

You can see that an RP can get a decent amount of information about a user and the authentication from the OP. It's all transmitted in the Id token, which must be validated to ensure that there's no funny business going on.

### Id Token Validation

> As an RP, you must [validate the Id token](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#IDTokenValidation) you receive to ensure that the authentication event occurred at the correct OP in the correct manner. This is a multi step process:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an RP, you must [validate the Id token](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#IDTokenValidation) you receive to ensure that the authentication event occurred at the correct OP, in the correct manner. This is a multi-step process:
```

* verify the signature (or encryption if the Id token is encrypted).
* ensure the `iss` claim matches the expected OP Issuer value.
* ensure the `aud` claim contains the RP `client_id`.
* validate that the time represented by the `exp` claim is in the future.

Because of the flexibility of OIDC, there will be other validation steps depending on what data is requested.

<Aside type="caution">
The combination of the `iss` and `sub` claims is guaranteed by OIDC to be unique and stable. If you are building an application and need a unique identifier for a user, make sure you use the combination of these.

The `sub` claim is guaranteed to be unique within any OP and never reassigned or changed.
</Aside>

> ### What Next?

Reviewer: I don't love this h3 but I don't have a better one.

Author: Took another shot at it.

> After validation, the RP can use the claims from the Id token. It might use these in a number of different ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After validation, the RP can use the claims from the Id token. It might use these in many different ways:
```
